# getMCI
This code uses methods described in Pallotti 2015 to extract the Morphological Complexity Index from texts. Original code is for English texts and was modified for use on Spanish (MCI_es)and German(MCI_de).

## Morphological Complexity Index

Brezina and Pallotti (2019) invented the Morphological Complexity Index (MCI), a measure of morphological complexity that describes the average verbal inflectional diversity (ex. talk, talking, talks). The MCI is calculated by extracting the inflectional morphemes of each word class. Then 100 random samples of 10 morphemes are drawn, without replacement. The mean within-subset variety is the mean number of unique forms in each random sample of size 10. The maximum within-subset variety value would be 10 if for each 100 samples, 10 unique morphemes were drawn. The minimum would be 1, if for each 100 samples there was only 1 unique morpheme used. Therefore, texts with a large variety of differently inflected words score higher in within-subject variety compared to texts with many repeating morphemes. The between subset diversity is calculated by pairing each of the 100 subsets, and calculating the number of unique morphemes in each pair. The minimum number would be 20, if each of the paired samples had 10 unique morphemes. The minimum would be 0 if the samples had no unique morphemes between them. This means that texts with a diversity of morphemes, as well as many repeating morphemes score higher in between subset diversity. Therefore, longer texts are likely to score higher in between subset diversity. The between subset diversity of the text is divided by two in order to combat length effects.

MCI = withinsubsetvariety + (betweensubsetdiversity/2) − 1 (2)

Brezina and Pallotti (2019) use this MCI on Italian learner texts and Italian native texts, and found that the MCI was positively correlated to proficiency. In a second evaluation on English language texts they found no marked difference between natives and non-natives nor between different levels of proficiency. They conclude that morphological complexity is predictive, depending on the language being examined, and that in languages like English with simple inflectional morphology, that the learners reach a threshold of complexity. It is therefore obvious that language-specific characteristics have an effect on the effectiveness of complexity measures. As such, automatic assessment protocol should take into account language typology when deciding measures. For instance, the CAF model doesn’t take into account verbal inflectional morphology, despite the fact that language tests (for romance languages) often center correct and diverse verbal inflection. Bult ́e and Roothooft (2020) used the MCI in their study. Brezina and Pallotti use MCI to measure verbal inflectonal morphology, but in principle this could be used with any word class. Many automatic complexity tools do not have any measures of morphological complexity 3; this index is one of the few widely cited measures of morphological complexity. The publicly available tool, ”Morpho-Complexity Tool”, can work with single texts in English, French, German, Spanish, Italian up to 50,000 characters (Brezina and Pallotti, 2015). However, there are no instructions online about how to batch process texts. Previous studies have used small sample sizes (Bult ́e and Roothooft, 2020; De Clercq and Housen, 2019). To process the large amounts of learner data, the calculation was recreated for this project. This thesis utilizes a similar methodology to that of ’Morpho-Complexity-Tool’. The calculation that is described further in section 6. Another weakness of this tool is that it works on a limited number of languages. In order to produce something replicable on various language families, one would need to create their own code.
